README.md, before:


# DLMDWWDE - Data Engineering Project: POS Real-Time Integration

**University Project for Data Engineering**  
This project implements a real-time, data-intensive backend for Point-of-Sale (POS) transactions using a Microservice Architecture. The system is built to be reliable, scalable, maintainable, and secure while addressing data protection and governance. The project showcases modern data engineering principles, integrating message brokering, monitoring, secrets management, and real-time data processing.

---

## Table of Contents

- [DLMDWWDE - Data Engineering Project: POS Real-Time Integration](#dlmdwwde---data-engineering-project-pos-real-time-integration)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Project Goals](#project-goals)
  - [System Architecture](#system-architecture)
    - [High-Level Architecture](#high-level-architecture)
    - [Sequence Diagram](#sequence-diagram)
    - [Dependency Diagram](#dependency-diagram)
  - [Vault Structure](#vault-structure)
  - [Key Features](#key-features)
  - [Setup Instructions](#setup-instructions)
    - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    - [Steps to Run](#steps-to-run)
  - [Monitoring and Observability](#monitoring-and-observability)
  - [Data Security and Governance](#data-security-and-governance)
  - [Challenges and Lessons Learned](#challenges-and-lessons-learned)
    - [Challenges](#challenges)
    - [Lessons Learned](#lessons-learned)
  - [Future Enhancements](#future-enhancements)
  - [Contact](#contact)

---

## Overview

This project demonstrates a real-time integration platform for POS data, designed to simulate a production-grade data engineering workflow. It supports:

- Real-time POS transaction streaming
- Transaction validation
- Data aggregation for analytics
- Monitoring, tracing, and logging
- Secure secrets management via Vault

The infrastructure is fully containerized with **Docker Compose**, enabling rapid local deployment and reproducibility.

---

## Project Goals

- **Reliability**: Ensure fault-tolerant communication between services.
- **Scalability**: Design the system to handle increasing transaction volumes.
- **Maintainability**: Use modular and reusable Microservice Architecture.
- **Data Security**: Safeguard sensitive information using Vault.
- **Data Governance**: Ensure compliance with data handling and storage regulations.
- **Observability**: Provide detailed insights into system health and performance.

---

## System Architecture

### High-Level Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart LR

    subgraph POS_Environment
    POS[(POS Service)] -->|transactions| Validation[Validation Service]
    Validation -->|valid transactions| Aggregation[Aggregation Pipeline]
    end

    Aggregation -->|aggregated data| MessageBroker[Solace PubSub+]
    POS -->|credentials / configs| Vault
    Validation -->|credentials / configs| Vault
    Aggregation -->|credentials / configs| Vault
    MessageBroker -->|credentials / configs| Vault

    subgraph Monitoring_Stack
    OTel[OTel Collector] --> Prometheus[Prometheus]
    OTel --> Tempo[Tempo]
    OTel --> Grafana[Grafana]
    SolaceExporter[Solace Prometheus Exporter] --> Prometheus
    end

    MessageBroker <--> OTel
    Validation <--> OTel
    POS <--> OTel
    Aggregation <--> OTel

    Traefik --> POS
    Traefik --> Validation
    Traefik --> Aggregation

    Terraform --> Vault
    Terraform --> MessageBroker
    Terraform --> POS
    Terraform --> Validation
    Terraform --> Aggregation
    Terraform --> OTel
    Terraform --> Prometheus
    Terraform --> Grafana
    Terraform --> Tempo
    Terraform --> Traefik
```

---

### Sequence Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant POS as POS Service
    participant Validation as Validation Service
    participant Broker as Message Broker
    participant Aggregation as Aggregation Pipeline
    participant Vault as Vault

    POS->>Validation: POST /validate_transaction
    Validation->>Vault: Fetch credentials
    Validation->>POS: HTTP 200 OK
    Validation->>Broker: Publish to Solace topic
    Broker->>Aggregation: Subscribe and process
    Aggregation->>Vault: Fetch configuration
    Aggregation->>Broker: Publish aggregated metrics
```

---

### Dependency Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD

    subgraph Services
    POS-->Validation
    Validation-->MessageBroker
    MessageBroker-->Aggregation
    end

    subgraph Infrastructure
    Terraform-->MessageBroker
    Terraform-->Vault
    Terraform-->POS
    Terraform-->Validation
    Terraform-->Aggregation
    end

    subgraph Observability
    OTel-->Prometheus
    OTel-->Tempo
    OTel-->Grafana
    SolaceExporter-->Prometheus
    end

    Traefik-->POS
    Traefik-->Validation
    Traefik-->Aggregation
    Vault-->POS
    Vault-->Validation
    Vault-->Aggregation
    Vault-->MessageBroker
    Vault-->OTel
```

---

## Vault Structure

The system uses Vault to manage configurations and secrets.

```
kv/
├── vault-service/
│   ├── config/
│   │   ├── vault_addr
│   │   ├── api_addr
│   ├── creds/
│       ├── token/
│       │   ├── root_token
├── message-broker/
│   ├── config/
│   │   ├── http_host
│   │   ├── http_port
│   │   ├── http_protocol
│   │   ├── smf_host
│   │   ├── smf_port
│   │   ├── smf_protocol
│   │   ├── health_host
│   │   ├── health_port
│   │   ├── health_protocol
│   │   ├── amqp_host
│   │   ├── amqp_port
│   │   ├── msg_vpn
│   │   ├── pos_topic_prefix
│   │   ├── aggregation-service/
│   │   │   ├── queue_name
│   ├── creds/
│       ├── login/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── otel/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── validation-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── aggregation-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
├── validation-service/
│   ├── config/
│       ├── api_protocol
│       ├── api_host
│       ├── api_port
│   ├── creds/
│       ├── aggregation-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── pos-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
├── __aggregation-service/ -> read-only__ 
├── __pos-service/ -> read-only__
├── __otel-collector/ -> read-only__
```

---

## Key Features

1. **Message Brokering**: Solace PubSub+ facilitates communication between services.
2. **Monitoring and Observability**: 
   - OpenTelemetry for tracing
   - Prometheus and Grafana for metrics visualization
   - Tempo for distributed tracing
3. **Secrets Management**: Vault securely stores secrets and credentials.
4. **Load Balancing**: Traefik enables reliable service routing.

---

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose installed
- Terraform and Vault CLI (optional for debugging)

### Steps to Run

1. Clone the repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Tuuliyo/DLMDWWDE.git
   cd DLMDWWDE
   ```

2. Start the system:

   ```bash
   docker-compose up --build
   ```

3. Access services:
   - Solace PubSub+: [http://localhost:8088](http://localhost:8088) (admin/admin)
   - Grafana: [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) (admin/admin)
   - Prometheus: [http://localhost:9090](http://localhost:9090)

---

## Monitoring and Observability

- OpenTelemetry Collector gathers and exports traces.
- Prometheus scrapes metrics from services and Solace.
- Grafana provides dashboards for real-time analytics.
- Tempo stores distributed traces for debugging.

---

## Data Security and Governance

- Vault secures secrets using policies and role-based access control.
- All credentials are dynamically injected into services at runtime.
- AppRole ensures service-specific access to Vault secrets.

---

## Challenges and Lessons Learned

### Challenges

- Ensuring service reliability under high transaction volumes.
- Managing dynamic secret injection in Vault with multiple services.
- Debugging distributed traces across services.

### Lessons Learned

1. **Technical Skills**:
   - Advanced usage of Docker Compose and Vault.
   - Implementing observability using OpenTelemetry, Prometheus, and Grafana.
   - Writing scalable microservices using Python.

2. **Soft Skills**:
   - Effective debugging of distributed systems.
   - Time management and task prioritization.
   - Clear documentation for reproducibility.

---

## Future Enhancements

- Automate scaling and failover testing.
- Enhance security with TLS for all services.
- Add support for batch processing alongside streaming.

---

## Contact

For further information, please contact:  
- **Name**: Jonas Kinold
- **LinkedIn**: [Jonas Kinold](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jonas-kinold/)
- **GitHub**: [Tuuliyo](https://github.com/Tuuliyo)

Commit message:

instrument aggregation service for metrics export

README.md, after:


# DLMDWWDE - Data Engineering Project: POS Real-Time Integration

**University Project for Data Engineering**  
This project implements a real-time, data-intensive backend for Point-of-Sale (POS) transactions using a Microservice Architecture. The system is built to be reliable, scalable, maintainable, and secure while addressing data protection and governance. The project showcases modern data engineering principles, integrating message brokering, monitoring, secrets management, and real-time data processing.

---

## Table of Contents

- [DLMDWWDE - Data Engineering Project: POS Real-Time Integration](#dlmdwwde---data-engineering-project-pos-real-time-integration)
  - [Table of Contents](#table-of-contents)
  - [Overview](#overview)
  - [Project Goals](#project-goals)
  - [System Architecture](#system-architecture)
    - [High-Level Architecture](#high-level-architecture)
    - [Sequence Diagram](#sequence-diagram)
    - [Dependency Diagram](#dependency-diagram)
  - [Vault Structure](#vault-structure)
  - [Key Features](#key-features)
  - [Setup Instructions](#setup-instructions)
    - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
    - [Steps to Run](#steps-to-run)
  - [Monitoring and Observability](#monitoring-and-observability)
  - [Data Security and Governance](#data-security-and-governance)
  - [Challenges and Lessons Learned](#challenges-and-lessons-learned)
    - [Challenges](#challenges)
    - [Lessons Learned](#lessons-learned)
  - [Future Enhancements](#future-enhancements)
  - [Contact](#contact)

---

## Overview

This project demonstrates a real-time integration platform for POS data, designed to simulate a production-grade data engineering workflow. It supports:

- Real-time POS transaction streaming
- Transaction validation
- Data aggregation for analytics
- Monitoring, tracing, and logging
- Secure secrets management via Vault

The infrastructure is fully containerized with **Docker Compose**, enabling rapid local deployment and reproducibility.

---

## Project Goals

- **Reliability**: Ensure fault-tolerant communication between services.
- **Scalability**: Design the system to handle increasing transaction volumes.
- **Maintainability**: Use modular and reusable Microservice Architecture.
- **Data Security**: Safeguard sensitive information using Vault.
- **Data Governance**: Ensure compliance with data handling and storage regulations.
- **Observability**: Provide detailed insights into system health and performance.

---

## System Architecture

### High-Level Architecture

```mermaid
flowchart LR

    subgraph POS_Environment
    POS[(POS Service)] -->|transactions| Validation[Validation Service]
    Validation -->|valid transactions| Aggregation[Aggregation Pipeline]
    end

    Aggregation -->|aggregated data| MessageBroker[Solace PubSub+]
    POS -->|credentials / configs| Vault
    Validation -->|credentials / configs| Vault
    Aggregation -->|credentials / configs| Vault
    MessageBroker -->|credentials / configs| Vault

    subgraph Monitoring_Stack
    OTel[OTel Collector] --> Prometheus[Prometheus]
    OTel --> Tempo[Tempo]
    OTel --> Grafana[Grafana]
    SolaceExporter[Solace Prometheus Exporter] --> Prometheus
    end

    MessageBroker <--> OTel
    Validation <--> OTel
    POS <--> OTel
    Aggregation <--> OTel

    Traefik --> POS
    Traefik --> Validation
    Traefik --> Aggregation

    Terraform --> Vault
    Terraform --> MessageBroker
    Terraform --> POS
    Terraform --> Validation
    Terraform --> Aggregation
    Terraform --> OTel
    Terraform --> Prometheus
    Terraform --> Grafana
    Terraform --> Tempo
    Terraform --> Traefik
```

---

### Sequence Diagram

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    autonumber
    participant POS as POS Service
    participant Validation as Validation Service
    participant Broker as Message Broker
    participant Aggregation as Aggregation Pipeline
    participant Vault as Vault

    POS->>Validation: POST /validate_transaction
    Validation->>Vault: Fetch credentials
    Validation->>POS: HTTP 200 OK
    Validation->>Broker: Publish to Solace topic
    Broker->>Aggregation: Subscribe and process
    Aggregation->>Vault: Fetch configuration
    Aggregation->>Broker: Publish aggregated metrics
```

---

### Dependency Diagram

```mermaid
graph TD

    subgraph Services
    POS-->Validation
    Validation-->MessageBroker
    MessageBroker-->Aggregation
    end

    subgraph Infrastructure
    Terraform-->MessageBroker
    Terraform-->Vault
    Terraform-->POS
    Terraform-->Validation
    Terraform-->Aggregation
    end

    subgraph Observability
    OTel-->Prometheus
    OTel-->Tempo
    OTel-->Grafana
    SolaceExporter-->Prometheus
    end

    Traefik-->POS
    Traefik-->Validation
    Traefik-->Aggregation
    Vault-->POS
    Vault-->Validation
    Vault-->Aggregation
    Vault-->MessageBroker
    Vault-->OTel
```

---

## Vault Structure

The system uses Vault to manage configurations and secrets.

```
kv/
├── vault-service/
│   ├── config/
│   │   ├── vault_addr
│   │   ├── api_addr
│   ├── creds/
│       ├── token/
│       │   ├── root_token
├── message-broker/
│   ├── config/
│   │   ├── http_host
│   │   ├── http_port
│   │   ├── http_protocol
│   │   ├── smf_host
│   │   ├── smf_port
│   │   ├── smf_protocol
│   │   ├── health_host
│   │   ├── health_port
│   │   ├── health_protocol
│   │   ├── amqp_host
│   │   ├── amqp_port
│   │   ├── msg_vpn
│   │   ├── pos_topic_prefix
│   │   ├── aggregation-service/
│   │   │   ├── queue_name
│   ├── creds/
│       ├── login/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── otel/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── validation-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── aggregation-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
├── validation-service/
│   ├── config/
│       ├── api_protocol
│       ├── api_host
│       ├── api_port
│   ├── creds/
│       ├── aggregation-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
│       ├── pos-service/
│       │   ├── username
│       │   ├── password
├── __aggregation-service/ -> read-only__ 
├── __pos-service/ -> read-only__
├── __otel-collector/ -> read-only__
```

---

## Key Features

1. **Message Brokering**: Solace PubSub+ facilitates communication between services.
2. **Monitoring and Observability**: 
   - OpenTelemetry for tracing
   - Prometheus and Grafana for metrics visualization
   - Tempo for distributed tracing
3. **Secrets Management**: Vault securely stores secrets and credentials.
4. **Load Balancing**: Traefik enables reliable service routing.

---

## Setup Instructions

### Prerequisites

- Docker and Docker Compose installed
- Terraform and Vault CLI (optional for debugging)

### Steps to Run

1. Clone the repository:

   ```bash
   git clone https://github.com/Tuuliyo/DLMDWWDE.git
   cd DLMDWWDE
   ```

2. Start the system:

   ```bash
   docker-compose up --build
   ```

3. Access services:
   - Solace PubSub+: [http://localhost:8088](http://localhost:8088) (admin/admin)
   - Grafana: [http://localhost:3000](http://localhost:3000) (admin/admin)
     - http://localhost:3000/explore for open telemtry traces
     - http://localhost:3000/explore/metrics for metrics of the different services
   - Prometheus: [http://localhost:9090](http://localhost:9090)

---

## Monitoring and Observability

- OpenTelemetry Collector gathers and exports traces.
- Prometheus scrapes metrics from services and Solace.
- Grafana provides dashboards for real-time analytics.
- Tempo stores distributed traces for debugging.

---

## Data Security and Governance

- Vault secures secrets using policies and role-based access control.
- All credentials are dynamically injected into services at runtime.
- AppRole ensures service-specific access to Vault secrets.

---

## Challenges and Lessons Learned

### Challenges

- Ensuring service reliability under high transaction volumes.
- Managing dynamic secret injection in Vault with multiple services.
- Debugging distributed traces across services.

### Lessons Learned

1. **Technical Skills**:
   - Advanced usage of Docker Compose and Vault.
   - Implementing observability using OpenTelemetry, Prometheus, and Grafana.
   - Writing scalable microservices using Python.

2. **Soft Skills**:
   - Effective debugging of distributed systems.
   - Time management and task prioritization.
   - Clear documentation for reproducibility.

---

## Future Enhancements

- Automate scaling and failover testing.
- Enhance security with TLS for all services.
- Add support for batch processing alongside streaming.

---

## Contact

For further information, please contact:  
- **Name**: Jonas Kinold
- **LinkedIn**: [Jonas Kinold](https://www.linkedin.com/in/jonas-kinold/)
- **GitHub**: [Tuuliyo](https://github.com/Tuuliyo)
